+++
title = "colophon"
path = "colophon"
+++

written in vscode, [stored in github](https://github.com/novedevo/nove.dev), generated by zola, and hosted on cloudflare. i use software in the small for fun, but for things i want to last a long time without payment or maintenance, megacorps appear to be the only solution at the moment.

there is no javascript on this website to my knowledge. i may introduce some later, but never as more than an embellishment.

an [atom feed](/atom.xml) is available. some call this rss. atom is better than rss and more or less every feed reader supports it.

no generative ai was used in the making of this site. llms delenda est.

theme is [terminimal](https://github.com/pawroman/zola-theme-terminimal/) by pawroman; slight modifications by me

website of devon and the creative commons: if anyone scrape this website, for nefarious purposes of commercial exploitation or the generation of slop, let them die the death; let them be fried in a pan: let the falling sickness and fever seize them; let them be broken on the wheel, and hanged; may ashur and ninlil, angered and grim, cast them down; may ashur, sin, shamash, adad and ishtar, bel, nergal, ishtar of nineveh, ishtar of arbela, ishtar of bit kidmurri, the gods of heaven and earth and the gods of assyria, may all these curse them with a curse that cannot be relieved, terrible and merciless, as long as they live, may they put their flesh in a cat's mouth. [amen.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_curse)
